The seven-line prayer in Tibetan and English, and then a minute of meditation, and then we begin.
[Singing]
[Singing continues]
And so the floor is now open for you to ask questions, so Rinpoche, about your practice, your study
,
if you are in discussion, book discussion group, whatever is uppermost on your mind. Thank you.
But not strong market. I don't know any of those indexes in the back and forth, any of those.
I only know that [inaudible]
I have a question about the three kyas, and from the root text on, I guess, it's page 35.
It says, "Do not reject the thoughts, see them as dharmakaya." Could you say something about the
three kyas and how they relate to us?
Three kyas, generally, of course, is something that all the Mahayana and Vedayana practitioners
goal to achieve, realization of the three kyas.
The dharmakaya and the sambhokaya, and the nirmakaya, those three kyas, they are also externally
existing dharmakaya,
such as known as the Buddha Samyandabhadra, and then dharmakaya, sambhokaya Buddha, such as the
Buddha Vaidya Sattva.
The makaya Buddha, such as the Buddha Shakyamuni, those are known as the Buddhas of the three kyas.
But according to the Zokhi level, the ultimate level, the three kyas, is not just only the external
, existing, or that we see,
but naturally inherited to all of us, that three kyas, because in the Buddha's teaching, everyone
inherits the Buddha's nature.
Everyone has the opportunity to become the Buddha and they can achieve the dharmakaya, the sambhok
aya, and the nirmakaya.
So then, where is that? Where is that three kyas now?
And then that is when it comes, then there are no other, any other places except our mind, three ky
as in our mind.
And so in the Zokhi teaching, what is that dharmakaya? It is our nature of the mind, nature of the
mind.
Mind has generally three qualities. It has three qualities known as the emptiness, the clarity, and
the displace.
Those are the really that we can experience the three qualities of the mind.
So these three, nature is no other than the three kyas.
So the emptiness aspect of the nature of the mind is dharmakaya.
The clarity aspect of the nature of the mind is sambhokaya.
And then the display, that means the arising thought, all these thoughts are dharmakayas.
So therefore, mind is the ultimate level, mind is the embodiment of the three kyas.
And therefore, in the Zokhi teaching, always in the teaching series,
then what do you say? There is something, that quotation, you read that? What is it?
This is from the root text. It says, "Do not reject the thoughts, see them as dharmakaya."
That's true. So rejecting thought, rejecting thought is what that actually really means.
According again to the ultimate level, you are discriminating.
You want something, you don't want something.
Wanting and not wanting is discrimination.
And ultimately, wanting and not wanting is then dualities, is the ego tricks.
Therefore, don't reject thought. And also, don't stop in thought.
Then in the Zokhi teaching, I'm sure it's there too, always said, "Let it come, let it go, let it
be."
That is what really is the nature. Because when thought comes, you're not making any effort,
or nobody is making any effort to come towards.
The thoughts are coming naturally. And also, if you don't hold that,
naturally thought goes away. It's not going to stay.
In a way, is that thought happening in the state of emptiness?
What that means? Have you looked at where thought is existing?
Where it comes from, where it's existing, where it's went?
There is no any pinpoint location that you can see at all.
And that is in the Buddha teaching or the Zokhi teaching known as dharmakaya.
That is the basic nature of everything.
But that nature is with us. Therefore, if we meditate and practice continually,
and do good things, then discover good things means also nothing is going to be able to be alien,
or anything that is beside our goodness of nature.
Bring more love, more kindness, more compassion, and let that come, let that be,
let that display and then continually come, enjoying the moment.
Then that is known as you're relaxing, enjoying the beauty of the nature of our mind,
the beauty of the nature of others, or externally.
- Thank you. - Okay.
- Thank you. - Thank you.
Good morning, Prinpoche again. Where does karma begins? Does it begin in our thoughts?
- Yeah. - Does your thoughts have karma effect?
Karma begins from thought. Really karma is, I mean, again, in the Buddha teaching,
that the Buddha's first teaching is called poor noble truth.
I mean, you all know poor noble truth.
That's suffering truth, cause of suffering truth,
and the path truth, cessation truth.
So, this cause of suffering truth is the beginning of the karma, karma.
And that, what is that cause of suffering truth is?
Is negative emotions and it is activities.
Negative emotions is a fundamental cause or the root of the karma.
And that negative emotion comes from what?
Then every go back, it comes from, most of the time, ego clings.
And that way is ego clings from, is dualities.
Where duality comes from is comes from ignorance.
Where ignorance comes from is comes grasping, clinging.
The clinging is the root of the troubles.
Where is that clinging?
There is no way you can point. Nothing you can see.
So it is coming from emptiness.
Emptiness is happening in the emptiness and is dissolving,
merging back to the emptiness.
That duality is our own, nobody forces us,
but our own habit pattern with the mistakenly or the ignorancely,
we begin grasping, clinging.
And then it creates more and is igniting or what's called clashing back and forth in the mental
state.
It creates a publication and it becomes known as ego clinging.
It is one of the clinging truths. Ego is one of the clinging.
And then that becomes more kind of, more expanded.
And then is all those negative emotions, five poses and so forth.
And then activity of the five poses as we join in a prayer of the conjugate,
then all those creation comes.
All those troubles are then one after another is coming.
That's like nightmare dreams.
Yes?
You once spoke of how the afflictive emotions and the five poisons
are misunderstanding of the correlating wisdom.
Would you speak a little about how our emotions
are just a misunderstanding of the ignorance of the wisdom therein?
Again, even though we say negative emotion, I mean negative emotion is bad.
But negative emotions, if you think, the nature of the negative,
there's nothing really, if you look at those emotions, there's nothing existing.
There's nothing, even for example, raging anger comes.
It is a big disturbance.
It's disturbing one's own peaceful mind status.
It's disturbing others.
But where is that anger?
If you look as a lakshaki teacher or as a religious teacher, Buddha pointed out,
there's nothing really existing at all, at all.
We are grasping.
What is magic? We're grasping.
We get that emotion. We're holding onto that.
We get more. That means we're keeping up that fuel.
And not just the fuel, we're more airing that, getting excellent,
segregating back and forth that.
And that is the same nature of all the emotions too.
For that reason, in the Dokhi teaching, often he said,
"Liberating. Liberated it."
And to where? To the wisdom status.
And also, wisdom is not something solid existing there is.
It exists, but it's a trap that distributes.
Instead that it brings new energy in the mental status.
Calm and peace, more soothing, more understanding.
So therefore, it's called wisdom.
Then you go, each of those negative emotions is known as the five wisdom.
The five poisons are the nature of the five.
The five poisons are the nature of the five wisdom,
or there are five wisdom.
And so, then, this anger is the wisdom of the merrily wisdom.
Anger is merrily wisdom.
And jealous is all accomplishing wisdom.
And then, the wisdom of attachment is
the wisdom of discrimination, awareness of wisdom.
And the arrogance is the wisdom of the economic wisdom.
Then, the fifth one is the ignorance.
The ignorance is known as the wisdom of the dharma-dhatu,
or dharma-dhatu wisdom.
So those are the five wisdom with the activating,
outreaching to the externally.
Realistically, all those are, really, there is nothing solid existing at all.
And therefore, all is within the dharma-caya status,
or dharma-dhatu status, wisdom.
So therefore, even though there are so big disturbances of these emotions,
if you handle that so nicely, and that's why many times in the Dzokhi teaching
said as much as the emotions are bigger, that much is our,
our systems are growing.
That if you can handle that, then of course, if you can't handle,
then as much as emotion comes, that might become the disturbances.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Cheers.
Okay.
Good morning, Rinpoche.
When the body dies, and the soul, or rikpa, separates from the body,
how long can it remain separated before it decides to reincarnate?
That, darling, according to the teaching,
that decision is not really real American decision.
I mean, only who can make the decision is those people who had good stabilization
of the meditation, or good practitioners.
They can make some decisions, or when they're going to reincarnate,
or when they're going to take the rebirth.
But otherwise, majority people are, there's no, can't have any choices.
Follow in the karma.
That's really karmic wind.
Follow in the karmic wind.
So, for that reason, according to the teaching,
the maximum average and the minimum average.
And maximum average, according to the teaching,
after the people died, and their consciousness can stay for 49 days.
That is the average maximum.
Minimum average is three days.
That is the minimum average.
And then, between that, again, of course, is karma.
And some individuals could say, but very soon, not just three days, very soon,
some individuals, due to the karma, again, can stay a long time,
according to the teaching, even after 49 days.
So, this is all karmic wind, then, now.
Mostly, it's really completely controlled, regulated by one's own karmas, most of the time.
Thank you.
Thank you, Jane.
Rumbuchi, at the prayer, sometimes we are free from four extremes.
So, existing, non-existing, both and neither.
Could you please, both and neither,
or the situations one practitioner may encounter during our practice of the view,
that we talked a lot about existing and non-existing,
but both and neither, how could that happen to a practitioner?
This is what is known as, when you practice, or when you're studying,
the Buddha teaching is called, known as vu, vu, vu, meditation,
and then, result of the achievement and conduct.
So, this existing, non-existing, neither, neither,
is generally more applied to the view.
The view is what you're really going to meditate, meditate.
So, what is the view?
The view is, that view is, of course, what you meditate, according to Buddhism,
you meditate on the true nature, true nature of the,
where there is an external phenomena, or where there is an inner mind, or mind.
So, let's talk with more kind of practical way, simple way, to talk with the mind.
So, now, mind is free from existing, non-existing, neither, and either.
That means, is also, this is generally in the Buddha teaching,
what you all know that, related truth and absolute truth.
Meditation is, when you meditate, we're engaging with absolute truth.
So, absolute truth of the nature of the mind is free from that,
for extremes, or for that.
So, now, when we look up that to the mind, to apply that to the mind,
mind is existing, or mind is not existing.
Have you asked that question, and what you have the answer?
What you have the answer? What do we have the answer?
Is really mind existing?
Have somebody asked, is mind existing?
Of course, we will say, yes, mind is existing, but where is mind?
That is Krishna, because you're going to say, yes, existing.
Of course, everyone will say, but where is that?
So, what then, what we will find, or what will be our answer? Where is that?
So, that is, when there is nothing, the answer is not that nothing, we don't.
According to the teaching, it's not something that we are dumb, that we didn't pound.
Because we are so smart, that's why we didn't pound.
Really, for therefore reason, what did he say there?
In the Buddha teaching, he said, when you don't find, that is greater pound.
Yeah, that is greater pound.
So, then now, we say there is no, not existing mind, in reality level, absolute levels.
But then, if we say, oh, there is no mind at all, then our, all these intelligence are coming.
All these thoughts are coming.
Where then, if there is no mind, where is the coming?
Coming.
So, then what we answer again, where is the coming?
So, for that reason, it is also, mind is preformed, not existing.
So, it is existing, so preformed existing and preformed non-existing.
So, it is true.
There is nothing really we can, we can pinpoint where mind is coming.
So, that's what is called preformed existing and non-existence.
I mean, that is what.
And then, neither said.
And then, mind is, any of those neither means, so then mind is existing, non-existing.
If this is the one, it is something that is existing, also non-existing.
But where is then that?
Where is that? It's just only the mind, the conception, the duality is trying to hold something.
But there is nothing really we can find.
Find.
So, therefore, then it is preformed, preformed existing, non-existing, or what's called pre-
existing, non-existing.
And neither.
Neither, because this is just making you hold like that.
But there is nothing really is existing at all.
And then, if it is, although it is neither either, that, that's the same thing.
If there is no existing, no, it is preformed existing, non-existing, and neither, then either is
the same thing.
It's just a conception, but there is nothing really, solid, existing, where we can hold.
Hold.
So, that's what is called, is nature is preformed extremes.
Stream, for that extreme, streams.
And that's what also in the Buddha teaching, in hard sattara.
The same thing, form is the emptiness, emptiness is the form.
It's no other than there is nothing really substantive.
Solid existing, that you can grasp or hold, in any other that can hold.
Hold onto that as existing.
Because this is, as I said, it is examining the absolute truth, how it is.
On the relative truth, yes, it exists in mind.
Existing, and mind is also sometimes not, I mean, all this we can apply the relative truth.
But absolute truth, there is nothing really solid, existing, that either of those we can hold onto
that.
And we may discover that, and relax on that status, and continually maintain that.
And that is known as keeping the will, which is meditation.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Related to what you were just speaking about, form is emptiness, and emptiness is form.
On page 34 of the root text, a beautiful, simple sentence.
"Thus awareness, in which appearance and emptiness are inseparably reunited, is the natural
sovereign of the three kayas, and the nature of primordial reality."
Absolutely gorgeous, and it is a restatement of form as emptiness and emptiness is form.
Okay, thank you.
Just one question.
The next sentence is, "The Dharmakaya beyond mind is suchness."
Could you kindly comment upon the statement by Guru Padmasambhava, the Dharmakaya, this is on page
34 of the root text.
"The Dharmakaya beyond mind is suchness."
Again, Dhukti teaching, according to Dhukti teaching, mind is duality. Mind is duality.
Therefore, what is mentioned here is that Dharmakaya is beyond duality, instead mind.
That's what I was missing, mind.
Yeah, that's it. Mind is.
Therefore, for example, in Dhukti teaching, distinction is between awareness and mind.
Awareness is beyond duality.
In Dhukti teaching, it is translated into English awareness, but in Tibetan word, it is known as r
upa, rupa.
Rupa is translated into English awareness, but rupa and mind.
Rupa, in Tibetan word, rupa and same, same is mind, same is duality.
Rupa is not duality. It is pristine awareness beyond duality.
So, Dharmakaya is pristine awareness.
Therefore, mind is, awareness is beyond duality, and when you discover that, that is suchness or
that is Dharmakaya.
Thank you very much.
Okay, thank you. Yes. Thank you. Thank you, Mark.
Thank you, Rupa Jai.
Even though in the Bardo we're basically blown along by karma, I've often wondered if the wisdom
mind at all has any influence in sort of guiding us
within the extent of our karma to a rebirth that will somehow help us with whatever it is that we
're struggling with that's keeping us from reaching enlightenment.
Definitely. According to the teaching, definitely wisdom has a lot of influences.
And particularly when we are practicing this, really there are many opportunities coming to regain
so that we can have some stabilization of taking the rebirth of our directions.
And that is, for example, in what those in the teaching said, liberating the enlightenment in the
moment of death, liberating the enlightenment or getting enlightenment right after death as Dharmak
aya said.
And then after that, getting enlightenment in the Sambokaya state and then getting enlightenment or
the high, nice kind of rebirth in the Narmakaya state.
Also during that Bardo, those are really making so that there's so many opportunities, particularly
being as practitioners that even though we didn't get highest realization within these lifetimes,
but due to the practices that really we can get a lot of opportunities and can turn that direction.
And that is in the teaching said, for example, moment of death, and then all those transitions
coming, according, of course, there are many ways to passing us.
But majority is, again, kind of graduations and graduations.
So therefore, then each time, those are like different element of the dissolving. So this element
of the dissolving, that time with different experiences, many different things, externally,
internally, and then more kind of secret level.
So really, we are good practitioners. Those indications, those inner signs are immediately kind of
indicating that now we are in the process of the living or changing our situation.
So they're re-stabilizing of their meditation, their practices, and therefore then they can reach
kind of good realization at that moment.
And somehow, if we couldn't, that happened, if we'd been good practitioners practicing zouqin, such
as the view, view what we're talking about, zouqin meditation.
And according to the teaching, when we passed away or that moment of death, the three elements are
merging, kind of like white element and red element that we obtained from our parents are coming,
losing their positions
and coming in different places. I mean, white element is mainly according to koran chakra and red
element that essentially is below, never chakra.
And then that kind of position is losing, kind of one is coming, one is coming down and one is
coming down.
And also at that moment, the inner vision that individual is really beginning to experience such
everything becomes so kind of white.
Everything is white experience coming, and one is red, his position is losing, coming up.
That individual experiencing such everything becomes so red. Red.
And then this position kind of both come up and don't.
And according to the teaching, it will meet at the heart level, heart center, around heart, and
there, then consciousness trapped.
And that moment that individual is experience completely kind of dark and blank states, nothing
that, nothing, it's completely that.
And that state is according to the teaching, teaching really won't stay long term.
It's just a poor moment, maybe just like even less than one minute could state that.
It could, again, depend with the individual, but it stays maybe just a short time, very short time.
When that kind of, that, that, that, that the gliding together, that strength lost, lost it, and
then it kind of breaks away.
And that moment, now the consciousness become completely single, single, kind of come out of that
trap.
And that moment, according to the teaching, in the Dzokhi teaching, said that that time, the
individual is experiencing the perfect Dharmakaya, what we're talking, the perfect Dharmakaya
realization, really.
And brilliant as blue sky, autumn sky, clear, pristine, brilliant that, and we individually have
been practicing this lifetime, that kind of like, what you see that moment.
And what you meditate, practice, what you learn that, and kind of immediately connected, that
immediately connected by your confidence, you go, oh, this is the realization state.
And that moment that individually really reaching the Dharmakaya status, according, then there's no
more part of those that you have to go through.
Right there, you reach the enlightenment.
So, we couldn't recognize, it's just also short time, and couldn't connect with that, then there's
many, many signs will come.
And those are known as light, beams of light, and song. Those, all is not yet externally existing,
is all the display of our primordial wisdom.
Light, and that, those are, when it comes, according to the teaching, again, those people who
really practice it, such as Dzokhi, like Toga practitioners, if they see that light,
they really see that, is again one's own display of the nature of the mind. So, immediately, they,
instead, like, usually what happens according to the teaching, when those visions come, immediately
we react.
Most of the time people reacted, and then they become really big in the nightmares.
It's reacting, right, and the subject, the object, and then somebody will be scared that we like to
hide this and that, and then it's kind of, just goes on and on then.
But instead, that moment, those appeared, and then you recognize, as once, only your display of the
nature, as the Toga displays, and that moment, then those individuals are really reaching
enlightenment in the Sambokaya status.
No more further part of that. Then, if that didn't happen, that, and then according to the teaching
, then, again, there's many displays will come, one after another, and those all, then the peaceful,
wrath of Dzokhi's displays are beginning to coming up, one after another.
And then, in this lifetime, we are really practicing of the, such as the visualization of those Dz
okhi practices, and then that those images come, whatever the forms come, immediately you kind of
reconnect it, instead, scared, reject, or instead like to hide, or going away, you kind of merge it
with that, and those are then known as, also really, then, it will stop, rebirth.
And then, if it didn't happen, then continually we get all this one after another, kind of, just
going, and then, according to the teaching, teaching, you, 49 days, every, that average is 49 days,
and it has, I think, five weeks, so, three and a half, three and a half weeks, you get all those
regions, one after another, all those regions.
And, after two and a half weeks, and then, it started coming more, how many patterns of the picture
of rebirth, where, even if it's taken, that kind of, like, environment is, like, coming up, coming
up more, and more, that.
And, if those happened, if those people, he'd have some stabilization of their meditation, and that
is called, then you, you're choosing the Narmakaya pattern.
So, now, you're going to take the rebirth somewhere, but I'm going to take rebirth some of the
right places, right, right way, so, kind of, you have some stabilized that, and be with the mind
fulness, and then, take the rebirth, and that's called, like, transforming the Pardo, and the Narmak
aya Situations, those are known.
So, there's many, many, like, definitely opportunities comes, and what's that, and that, and then,
is also our definitely Narmakaya things, too.
Thank you.
Yes.
Yes, thank you.
Hi.
This, Rinpoche, is actually a follow-up question from page 35.
On page 35, it says, people have so many responsibilities in modern times, and then, it goes on to
say, you know, how to best practice under the circumstances.
So, can you comment on how we can bring our practice to work, in work-related situations, and maybe
an increasingly competitive environment?
How do we deal with that?
We still have to work with other people.
We need to get, we need to put foot on a table.
So, how do we deal with that on a daily basis, and still keep our humility and our practice?
Yeah, that is, generally, John, this is, the practice is not out.
Practice is in with our mind. Really, that's it.
Practice, generally, is not the way out you look, but practice is ultimately for how you take care
of your mind.
That is really the practices, practices.
So, in that way, and of course, externally, you do stay in a meditation, in a room, in a shrine,
all those things, is definitely very important.
But, most of the time, we practice transforming our daily activities into dharma because always, as
many as you can, there will be the kind of looking to our mind.
Even for a few seconds, really, I think it really will help. Where is my mind?
And then, sometimes, stress follows all the emotional things in all places. Instead, they are
completely saturated to the external focus.
But, when you have some quiet time, look inwardly. Take deeper breathing and release.
Long exhale. Breathe, express, and look to your mind. Look to the relax in that network.
And then, also, it can't be like, occasionally, bring out a little more compassion.
So, the body and the head and shoulders. All this is what I'm doing, what I'm trying to do is to
benefit to all the senses.
May that help or benefit somehow, really, which transforms that situation into dharma by compassion
and the power of the body.
Also, thinking of that in a minute or so, throughout the day, those are all known as really
transforming the situation more in dharma way than that.
And so, that is really it.
But, whenever you can have some time or when you have, even in the work places, if you're alone,
quiet, maybe three minutes, just relax and kind of meditate and look inwardly.
And just bring more joy and appreciation, compassion, and also some degree of what's called
comparing.
In the world, there are so many troubles and difficulties, but to compare with that, what I have is
not too big things.
So, I'm so thankful, so grateful. I will do good things to benefit to myself, to others.
May that happen by the blessings of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas.
So, those all are obviously.
Thank you, Rinpoche.
Thank you, thank you.
Yes? Yeah?
Sorry, I missed doing it.
Thank you, Rinpoche. I'm going to try to form this question because it's still a little bit of an
unformed thought.
But, we've been talking, you've been talking about Rigpa as non-duality mind. Our primordial
awareness is non-duality mind, which means there's no subject-object separation.
Even in the most settled periods of meditation, where thoughts come and go, there is still a sense
of an eye.
There is still a sense of a perceiver to what is.
Does that weaken with practice, or will it require becoming fully enlightened before that eye
really dissolves?
I mean, it seems like it's dug in there so hard.
No, that will take some time.
But when you're able to relax in an edge like that way, it really is good.
I mean, that's a really good success.
But to go away completely, the thought of the eye, it really will take time. And that's what in the
Buddha teaching, you heard five parts, ten bhumis.
Bhumis, those are the stages of the realization and level you're discovering or you're pretty from
the grasping attachments.
That will take time. But if we continue meditating like this, according to the Jogji teaching, then
we can get enlightenment.
And within these lifetimes, it still only takes time. It's not going to go immediately away.
Because this thought of the eye, or this eye is not just developed recently, according to the
Buddha teaching,
it really came from a long time ago. A long time ago, it is very difficult to completely go where
immediately it will take.
But if we do continually this practice and meditate, then we can use all of this eye or this
thought of the eye to benefit others, to inspire them.
So, it's not something that is completely bad all the time. But if we handle that thinking of
subject and object, we can benefit others.
But at the same time, soften our ego and soften our eyes or attitude of eyes, and then discover
really the nature of it as it is.
So, it's nothing really too bad all the time. But if we kind of carry with that force, then it
becomes big disturbances.
Okay. Okay. Yes, yes.
I just had a question regarding cutting through attachment and aversion. If you had any advice as
to how to cut through attachment and aversion after one has been introduced to the view?
After one has been introduced to the view? If you had any advice as to how to cut through
attachment and aversion?
And that is, I mean, generally, all our practice in meditation really will help to cut the
attachment. Right? That's why it's stronger. Right? Attachment.
I meant also in terms of, like, everyday, like, say, like, you know, likes, dislikes, the type of
aversion or attachment generated through all of this.
Yeah, but that, generally, the attachment, again, as the same way what Mary is discussing, that it
's really difficult immediately to go, to cut that completely.
But the effort we have, every have the good, I mean, always trying to have good mindfulness, really
good mindfulness.
The moment we are having disturbance of the attachment, instead of always objecting that or the
following after that, and look to yourself or to that thought of the attachment.
And then, immediately, look to that thought. That moment when you look to that, your attachment
thought, you're really cutting your attachment.
That moment, you cut that immediately. So, what cut? It cut that, the continual flowing attachment,
you stop that.
And then, when you look to your mind, to look to your mind, where that attachment coming, there's
again the same thing as we've discussed many times.
There's nothing in existence. It is completely open, emptiness status. So, that is really the
cutting attachment.
But, for example, good and bad and a hope and a fear, all these things, during the day time, let as
much as we can bring that strength of the mindfulness and not holding too much of that.
With worry and with anxiety or whatever that, if you don't do that, that is your handling of the
attachments or those difficulties.
So, that's what really we should, I mean, that's how we can reduce the attachment.
And the cutting is, that's what I said, according to Zokki teaching, and that's a look to the
source of the attachment moment is raging, and that is, that means, that moment you cut it.
That's it. You cut it without subject to the object. Yeah. Okay.
And aversion, when you're speaking about attachment, aversion would be the same thing. Same thing.
All these emotions, anything, emotions, whatever that is, really, we look to cut that by the
practices that is looking to each of those emotions.
And then, when you look, there's nothing substantial existing, and let it go. That's it. Let it go,
and then relax it, that stays for a few minutes or a few seconds, whatever you can do, that is
known as cutting that.
But it didn't mean completely you uprooted that. I mean, that will take time, and that will take
time, do that again and again, and that is known as practicing. We are practicing.
Yeah. Good. Okay. Anyone? Yeah. Wow, that's so good, then. Yeah. Yeah.
Rinpoche, thank you so much. Last week we talked just a little bit about pure relative truth. Is
pure relative truth then something like being in a state of non-returner, or can you have moments
of pure relative truth and then impure relative truth?
Does it go back and forth, or once you're there, are you always there?
No, it depends. I mean, it really depends. If you have the really good realization, then it is a
non-return status.
Okay. But pure relative truth is what that actually means. I'm sure maybe I spoke that all the day,
and maybe you're in. But pure relative truth is what Buddha sees these objects.
Oh, what? Like, Gurbama, Sambha, Seo, Buddha, Shakyamuni see everything, subject, object. That is
pure relative truth.
Or in other words, if I say that when you say pure land, when we're talking pure land, that pure
land, those individuals who are in pure land, what they see is pure relative truth.
Everything is pure relative. It is relative, but it's pure. It's relative truth is pure. So that's
it.
For us to see that, again, it won't come immediately, but when we are good meditating, good medit
ator, and good kind of experiences, then when you look to the world or when you think,
it feels kind of quite good, good and nice. Even we have a difficult and hard times that, but when
you're really good meditator, it kind of feels good.
And that is the beginning of the pure relative truth. Feels good, but okay, or I don't care. That
attitude, that attitude, all that is really beginning or the dawn of the pure relative truth.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Now then, my question is, what is the difference between pure relative truth and absolute truth?
Now I got confused, which I think is a good thing, to be a little confused.
Okay, okay. Pure relative truth and absolute truth. Absolute truth, what we're talking, is the
Buddha teaching, same, really same, everywhere, is beyond the conception.
That is the absolute truth. Pure relative truth is still you can play with conceptions.
For example, those individuals in the pure land of the Buddha Amitabha, it didn't mean all of that
beyond the duality.
There still are practitioners, many of that, according to you. For example, when we do the prayer
in the pure land of the Buddha Amitabha, I said, "May I be born in the pure land of the Buddha Amit
abha?"
From there, I can achieve all the bhoomis in one after another in that. So that means they are
really, that is, they are still dualities.
But because the power of the Buddha's blessings and your power, the inspirations, now you reach to
that stage.
So there is no more difficulty, troubles that become the hindrance of our practice or discover our
nature of the mind.
But at the same time, there is so many supporters that inspire ourselves.
We don't feel ladiness to practices or destruct that when continuing to grow that. So that is
really the pure.
Then when you get completely in the enlightened state, then everything is become purity.
And that is then, as I said, how Buddha sees. For example, what is Buddha seeing? He said, you know
, pure, pure, pure, what's called this?
What are we talking of? Pure states of the purity of the relative truth.
Purity of the relative truth, what is it? The five elements, the five female Buddhas.
Five aggregators are five male Buddhas. That is purity state of the relative truths.
According to the purity, that level, the relational level, these are all existing.
What we see is relative truths, but it is pure relative truths.
So all is enlightened, not emotions, not negativity, not that.
All really is a display of everything as five dhyana Buddhas or five female Buddhas, as well as
that.
Or sometimes they say that everything is a display of the male and the female and the children of
the Buddhas, some of the Buddhas.
Those are really the expressions of the pure relative truths.
Thank you everyone. Thank you. We do one. Page 11, the short dedication of merit, just that one
page.
Page 11. You remember?
By this merit.
Come on, little girl.
Ooh. This is Gandhi. Sorry, sorry. Really. Thank you, little girl.
Thank you. Thank you, everyone. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much, everyone.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much, everyone. Thank you. I really have one recorset and a
candle.
This is one of the wishes. And that is, I like to make every cane. This, this, this spot, this spot
is like very nice and beautiful as a zen garden.
Really like that. This one. So then when we open this, this curtains and also looks like kind of
extension of the room or the temple is kind of nice in this Buddha garden already.
So really, if anybody has some thoughts and how to make this. And I mean, it's already beautiful,
but still kind of a little bit added.
Really, it's just maybe every way. I don't know, again, how that is. I may be making to learn to we
have quite what's called the waterfalls, small waterfalls, small waterfalls.
Maybe really we can. Maybe if that happened, but if it's distracting mosquitoes, all those things,
then maybe, but, but otherwise, maybe really that is possible to put that spring, the waterfalls,
small ones and nice.
And then how to make this kind of put this bubble, bubble stones, bubble stones or if not, not kind
of that needed.
Then put the sands and maybe put this, what's called this slate, slate stones, slate stones.
And then it was already believed as those planters exactly that, but just really we can make this.
Then it's just an extension of that because also since there's a pen that is so the people outside
can see it won't become the distractions of those who are practicing here.
here so then it's really nice so that's my idea so if there is any way that you
can have kind of come up idea and a thought and to walk there as a song about
also I will come to you if you didn't we all kind of do that thank you thank you
thank you very much thank you thank you thank you really pure land like as nice
I always like the Zen garden but not a sand Zen garden but something is so
beautiful not so busy but also it's so nice they are very beautiful thank you
everyone thank you.